The Conduct Leading to Buddhahood

The Chapter With Yudhañjaya

The Perfection of Resolve

Temiya’s Conduct

“Then again when I was

the true-born son of the king of Kāsi,

Mūgapakkha was my name,

they called me Temiya.

None of the sixteen thousand court women

had given birth to a male.

After many days and nights

I was born, the only one.

To my father I was a dear son born with difficulty,

a light-bringer of impeccable lineage.

Holding a white parasol over my bed,

my father provided for me.

Sleeping on the fine bed,

then having awoken,

I saw the pale umbrella,

by which I had gone to hell.

At the sight of the umbrella

a terrible dread arose in me.

I reached the decision,

‘How can I be free of this?’

A former blood-relation of mine,

a goddess wishing to help,

saw my suffering

and enjoined me to three states.

‘Don’t show intelligence,

be as a fool to all creatures,

let all folk scorn you,

thus you will achieve your goal.’

When she had spoken,

I said the following.

‘I shall do your bidding,

just as you say, goddess.

You want what’s best for me, mom,

you desire my welfare, goddess.’

After hearing her words,

I was like one lost at sea reaching the shore.

I was thrilled, my mind elated,

and I resolved on three factors.

I became deaf, and dumb,

and crippled, unable to walk.

Resolving on these factors,

I lived for sixteen years.

Then they rubbed my hands and feet,

my tongue and ears as well,

and seeing no defect in me,

denounced me as ‘black-ear’.

Due to that, the entire country,

including the generals and priests,

with one mind

cheered as I was discarded.

When I heard of their decision

I was thrilled, my mind elated,

‘The goal for which I lived fervently

I have achieved.’

Bathed and oiled,

with my turban wrapped,

anointed, they held the umbrella

as they paraded me around the city.

After the seventh day holding the umbrella,

when the sun’s orb had risen,

I was taken out by chariot,

until the charioteer came to a wood.

Leaving the chariot in the open,

the bridled horse released from his hand,

the charioteer dug a pit

to bury me in the ground.

I was afraid for the many different

resolves that I had undertaken,

so I did not break that resolve,

because it was solely for awakening.

I had no dislike of my parents,

nor did I dislike myself.

But because omniscience is precious to me,

that is why I resolved on my vow.

Having resolved the three factors,

I lived for sixteen years.

There is no-one to equal my resolve:

this is my perfection of resolve.”
