So It Was Said 103

The Book of the Fours

The Chapter on the Brahmin’s Offering of the Teaching

Ascetics and Brahmins

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

“Mendicants, there are ascetics and brahmins who don’t truly understand about suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the path.

I don’t deem them as true ascetics and brahmins. Those venerables don’t realize the goal of life as an ascetic or brahmin, and don’t live having realized it with their own insight.

There are ascetics and brahmins who truly understand about suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the path.

I regard them as true ascetics and brahmins. Those venerables realize the goal of life as an ascetic or brahmin, and live having realized it with their own insight.”

The Buddha spoke this matter.

On this it is said:

“There are those who don’t understand suffering

and suffering’s cause,

and where all suffering

cease with no residue left behind.

And they do not know the path

that leads to the stilling of suffering.

They lack the heart’s release,

as well as the release by wisdom.

Unable to make an end,

they continue to be reborn and grow old.

But there are those who understand suffering

and suffering’s cause,

and where all suffering

cease with no residue left behind.

And they understand the path

that leads to the stilling of suffering.

They’re endowed with the heart’s release,

as well as the release by wisdom.

Able to make an end,

they don’t continue to be reborn and grow old.”

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I heard.
