So It Was Said 111

The Book of the Fours

The Chapter on the Brahmin’s Offering of the Teaching

Accomplishment in Ethics

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

“Mendicants, live by the ethical precepts and the monastic code. Live restrained in the monastic code, conducting yourselves well and resorting for alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest fault, keep the rules you’ve undertaken.

When you’ve done this, what more is there to do?

Suppose a mendicant has got rid of desire and ill will while walking, and has given up dullness and drowsiness, restlessness and remorse, and doubt. Their energy is roused up and unflagging, their mindfulness is established and lucid, their body is tranquil and undisturbed, and their mind is immersed in samādhi and unified.

Such a mendicant is said to be ‘keen and prudent, always energetic and resolute’ when walking.

Suppose a mendicant has got rid of desire and ill will while standing …

sitting …

or when lying down while awake.

Such a mendicant is said to be ‘keen and prudent, always energetic and resolute’ when lying down while awake.”

The Buddha spoke this matter.

On this it is said:

“Carefully walking, carefully standing,

carefully sitting, carefully lying;

a mendicant carefully bends their limbs,

and carefully extends them.

Above, below, all round,

as far as the planet extends;

they scrutinize the rise and fall

of phenomena such as the aggregates.

Meditating diligently like this,

peaceful, not restless,

training in what leads to serenity of heart,

always staying mindful;

they call that sort of mendicant

‘always determined’.”

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I heard.
