So It Was Said 110

The Book of the Fours

The Chapter on the Brahmin’s Offering of the Teaching

Walking

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

“Mendicants, suppose a mendicant has a sensual, malicious, or cruel thought while walking.

They tolerate it and don’t give it up, get rid of it, eliminate it, and obliterate it. Such a mendicant is said to be ‘not keen or prudent, always lazy, and lacking energy’ when walking.

Suppose a mendicant has a sensual, malicious, or cruel thought while standing …

sitting …

or when lying down while awake.

They tolerate it and don’t give it up, get rid of it, eliminate it, and obliterate it.

Such a mendicant is said to be ‘not keen or prudent, always lazy, and lacking energy’ when lying down while awake.

Suppose a mendicant has a sensual, malicious, or cruel thought while walking.

They don’t tolerate them, but give them up, get rid of them, eliminate them, and obliterate them.

Such a mendicant is said to be ‘keen and prudent, always energetic and resolute’ when walking.

Suppose a mendicant has a sensual, malicious, or cruel thought while standing …

sitting …

or when lying down while awake.

They don’t tolerate it, but give it up, get rid of it, eliminate it, and obliterate it.

Such a mendicant is said to be ‘keen and prudent, always energetic and resolute’ when lying down while awake.”

The Buddha spoke this matter.

On this it is said:

“Whether walking or standing,

sitting or lying down,

one who thinks a bad thought

to do with the domestic life

is practicing the wrong way,

lost among things that delude;

such a mendicant is incapable

of experiencing the highest awakening.

But one who, whether standing or walking,

sitting or lying down,

has calmed their thoughts,

loving peace of mind;

such a mendicant is capable

of experiencing the highest awakening.”

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I heard.
