So It Was Said 106

The Book of the Fours

The Chapter on the Brahmin’s Offering of the Teaching

With Divinity

This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.

“Mendicants, a family where the children honor their parents in their home is said to live with Divinity.

A family where the children honor their parents in their home is said to live with the elder gods.

A family where the children honor their parents in their home is said to live with the first tutors.

A family where the children honor their parents in their home is said to live with those worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods.

‘Divinity’ is a term for your parents.

‘Elder gods’ is a term for your parents.

‘First tutors’ is a term for your parents.

‘Worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods’ is a term for your parents.

Why is that?

Parents are very helpful to their children, they raise them, nurture them, and show them the world.”

The Buddha spoke this matter.

On this it is said:

“Parents are said to be ‘Divinity’

and ‘first tutors’.

They’re worthy of offerings dedicated to the gods <j>from their children,

for they love their offspring.

Therefore an astute person

would revere them and honor them

with food and drink,

clothes and bedding,

anointing and bathing,

and by washing their feet.

Because they serve

their parents like this,

they’re praised in this life by the astute,

and they depart to rejoice in heaven.”

This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I heard.
