Numbered Discourses 10.73

8. If You Want

Likable

“Mendicants, these ten likable, desirable, and agreeable things are rare in the world.

What ten?

Wealth,

beauty,

health,

ethical conduct,

the spiritual life,

friends,

learning,

wisdom,

good qualities,

and heaven are likable, desirable, and agreeable things that are rare in the world.

Ten things are roadblocks for these ten likable, desirable, and agreeable things that are rare in the world.

Sloth and lack of initiative are a roadblock for wealth. Lack of adornment and decoration are a roadblock for beauty. Unsuitable activity is a roadblock for health. Bad friendship is a roadblock for ethical conduct. Lack of sense restraint is a roadblock for the spiritual life. Dishonesty is a roadblock for friends. Not rehearsing is a roadblock for learning. Not wanting to listen and ask questions are roadblocks for wisdom. Lack of commitment and reviewing are roadblocks for good qualities. Wrong practice hinders heaven.

These ten things are roadblocks for these ten likable, desirable, and agreeable things that are rare in the world.

Ten things nourish these ten likable, desirable, and agreeable things that are rare in the world.

Application and initiative nourish wealth. Adornment and decoration nourish beauty. Suitable activity nourishes health. Good friendship nourishes ethical conduct. Sense restraint nourishes the spiritual life. Honesty nourishes friends. Rehearsing nourishes learning. Eagerness to listen and ask questions nourishes wisdom. Commitment and reviewing nourish good qualities. Right practice nourishes heaven.

These ten things nourish these ten likable, desirable, and agreeable things that are rare in the world.”
