Linked Discourses 11.10

Chapter One

Seers by the Ocean

At Sāvatthī.

“Once upon a time, mendicants, several seers who were ethical, of good character, settled in leaf huts on the ocean shore.

Now at that time a battle was fought between the gods and the titans.

Then the seers thought,

‘The gods are principled, the titans are unprincipled.

We may be at risk from the titans.

Why don’t we approach Sambara, lord of titans, and beg him for a pledge of safety?’

Then, as easily as a strong person would extend or contract their arm, those seers vanished from those leaf huts on the ocean shore and reappeared in Sambara’s presence.

Then those seers addressed Sambara in verse:

‘The seers have come to Sambara

to beg for a pledge of safety.

For you can give them what you wish,

whether danger or safety.’

‘There is no safety for seers,

the hated associates of Sakka!

Though you beg me for your safety,

I’ll only give you fear!’

‘Though we beg you for our safety,

you give us only fear.

This is what we get from you:

may endless peril come to you!

Whatever kind of seed you sow,

that is the fruit you reap.

A doer of good gets good,

a doer of bad gets bad.

You, my dear, have sown your own seed,

now you’ll experience the fruit.’

Then those seers, having cursed Sambara, as easily as a strong person would extend or contract their arm, vanished from Sambara’s presence and reappeared in those leaf huts on the ocean shore.

But after being cursed by the seers, Sambara woke in alarm three times that night.”
