Linked Discourses 11.18

Chapter Two

Who Sakka Worships

At Sāvatthī.

“Once upon a time, mendicants, Sakka, lord of gods, addressed his chariot handler Mātali,

‘My dear Mātali, harness the chariot with its team of a thousand thoroughbreds. We will go to a park and see the scenery.’

‘Yes, lord,’ replied Mātali. He harnessed the chariot and informed Sakka,

‘Good fellow, the chariot with its team of a thousand thoroughbreds has been harnessed.

Please go at your convenience.’

Then Sakka descended from the Palace of Victory, raised his cupped palms, and revered the various quarters.

So Mātali the chariot handler addressed Sakka in verse:

‘Those proficient in the three Vedas worship you,

as do all the aristocrats on earth,

the four great kings,

and the glorious host of Thirty.

So what’s the name of the spirit

that you worship, Sakka?’

‘Those proficient in the three Vedas worship me,

as do all the aristocrats on earth,

the four great kings,

and the glorious host of Thirty.

But I revere those accomplished in ethics,

who have long trained in immersion,

who have rightly gone forth

for the culmination of spiritual life.

I also worship those householders,

the ethical lay followers

who make merit, Mātali,

providing for a partner in a principled manner.’

‘Those who you worship

seem to be the best in the world, Sakka.

I too will worship

those who you worship, Sakka.’

After saying this, Maghavā the chief,

king of gods, Sujā’s husband,

having worshiped the various quarters

climbed into his chariot.”
