Linked Discourses 12.52

6. A Tree

Grasping

At Sāvatthī.

“There are things that fuel grasping. When you concentrate on the gratification provided by these things, your craving grows.

Craving is a requirement for grasping.

Grasping is a requirement for continued existence.

Continued existence is a requirement for rebirth.

Rebirth is a requirement for old age and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress to come to be.

That is how this entire mass of suffering originates.

Suppose a great mass of fire was burning with ten, twenty, thirty, or forty loads of wood.

And from time to time someone would toss in dry grass, cow dung, or wood.

Fed and fuelled by that, the great mass of fire would burn for a long time.

In the same way, there are things that fuel grasping. When you concentrate on the gratification provided by these things, your craving grows.

Craving is a requirement for grasping. …

That is how this entire mass of suffering originates.

There are things that fuel grasping. When you concentrate on the drawbacks of these things, your craving ceases.

When craving ceases, grasping ceases.

When grasping ceases, continued existence ceases.

When continued existence ceases, rebirth ceases.

When rebirth ceases, old age and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress cease.

That is how this entire mass of suffering ceases.

Suppose a great mass of fire was burning with ten, twenty, thirty, or forty loads of wood.

And no-one would toss in dry grass, cow dung, or wood from time to time.

As the original fuel is used up and no more is added, the great mass of fire would be extinguished due to not being fed.

In the same way, there are things that fuel grasping. When you concentrate on the drawbacks of these things, your craving ceases.

When craving ceases, grasping ceases. …

That is how this entire mass of suffering ceases.”
