Linked Discourses 12.42

5. Householders

Fears and Enmities (2nd)

At Sāvatthī.

“Mendicants, when a noble disciple has quelled five fears and enmities, possesses the four factors of stream-entry, and has clearly seen and penetrated the noble system with wisdom, they may, if they wish, declare of themselves:

‘I’ve finished with rebirth in hell, the animal realm, and the ghost realm. I’ve finished with all places of loss, bad places, the underworld. I am a stream-enterer! I’m not liable to be reborn in the underworld, and am assured, destined for awakening.’

What are the five fears and enmities they have quelled?

Killing living creatures …

stealing …

sexual misconduct …

lying …

consuming beer, wine, and liquor intoxicants …

These are the five fears and enmities they have quelled.

What are the four factors of stream-entry that they possess?

It’s when a noble disciple has experiential confidence in the Buddha …

the teaching …

the Saṅgha …

and their ethical conduct is loved by the noble ones.

These are the four factors of stream-entry that they possess.

And what is the noble system that they have clearly seen and penetrated with wisdom?

A noble disciple carefully and rationally applies the mind to dependent origination itself …

This is the noble system that they have clearly seen and penetrated with wisdom.

When a noble disciple has quelled five fears and enmities, possesses the four factors of stream-entry, and has clearly seen and penetrated the noble system with wisdom, they may, if they wish, declare of themselves:

‘I’ve finished with rebirth in hell, the animal realm, and the ghost realm. I’ve finished with all places of loss, bad places, the underworld. I am a stream-enterer! I’m not liable to be reborn in the underworld, and am assured, destined for awakening.’”
