Linked Discourses 12.1

1. The Buddhas

Dependent Origination

So I have heard.

At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery.

There the Buddha addressed the mendicants,

“Mendicants!”

“Venerable sir,” they replied.

The Buddha said this:

“Mendicants, I will teach you dependent origination.

Listen and apply your mind well, I will speak.”

“Yes, sir,” they replied.

The Buddha said this:

“And what is dependent origination?

Ignorance is a requirement for choices.

Choices are a requirement for consciousness.

Consciousness is a requirement for name and form.

Name and form are requirements for the six sense fields.

The six sense fields are requirements for contact.

Contact is a requirement for feeling.

Feeling is a requirement for craving.

Craving is a requirement for grasping.

Grasping is a requirement for continued existence.

Continued existence is a requirement for rebirth.

Rebirth is a requirement for old age and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress to come to be.

That is how this entire mass of suffering originates.

This is called dependent origination.

When ignorance fades away and ceases with nothing left over, choices cease.

When choices cease, consciousness ceases.

When consciousness ceases, name and form cease.

When name and form cease, the six sense fields cease.

When the six sense fields cease, contact ceases.

When contact ceases, feeling ceases.

When feeling ceases, craving ceases.

When craving ceases, grasping ceases.

When grasping ceases, continued existence ceases.

When continued existence ceases, rebirth ceases.

When rebirth ceases, old age and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress cease.

That is how this entire mass of suffering ceases.”

That is what the Buddha said.

Satisfied, the mendicants approved what the Buddha said.
