Linked Discourses 14.8

1. Diversity

No Diversity of Searches

At Sāvatthī.

“Mendicants, diversity of elements gives rise to diversity of perceptions. Diversity of perceptions gives rise to diversity of thoughts. Diversity of thoughts gives rise to diversity of desires. Diversity of desires gives rise to diversity of passions. Diversity of passions gives rise to diversity of searches.

Diversity of searches doesn’t give rise to diversity of passions. Diversity of passions doesn’t give rise to diversity of desires. Diversity of desires doesn’t give rise to diversity of thoughts. Diversity of thoughts doesn’t give rise to diversity of perceptions. Diversity of perceptions doesn’t give rise to diversity of elements.

And what is the diversity of elements?

The sight element, the sound element, the smell element, the taste element, the touch element, and the idea element.

This is called the diversity of elements.

And how does diversity of elements give rise to diversity of perceptions …

diversity of perceptions doesn’t give rise to diversity of elements?

The sight element gives rise to the perception of sights …

The idea element gives rise to the perception of ideas … the search for ideas.

The search for ideas doesn’t give rise to the passion for ideas. The passion for ideas doesn’t give rise to the desire for ideas. The desire for ideas doesn’t give rise to thoughts about ideas. Thoughts about ideas don’t give rise to perceptions of ideas. Perceptions of ideas don’t give rise to the idea element.

That’s how diversity of elements gives rise to diversity of perceptions …

diversity of perceptions doesn’t give rise to diversity of elements.”
