Linked Discourses 14.15

Chapter Two

Walking Together

At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, on the Vulture’s Peak Mountain.

Now at that time Venerable Sāriputta was walking together with several mendicants not far from the Buddha.

Venerable Mahāmoggallāna was doing likewise, as were

Venerable Mahākassapa,

Venerable Anuruddha,

Venerable Puṇṇa son of Mantāṇī,

Venerable Upāli,

Venerable Ānanda,

and Devadatta.

Then the Buddha said to the mendicants,

“Mendicants, do you see Sāriputta walking together with several mendicants?”

“Yes, sir.”

“All of those mendicants have great wisdom.

Do you see Moggallāna walking together with several mendicants?”

“Yes, sir.”

“All of those mendicants have great psychic power.

Do you see Kassapa walking together with several mendicants?”

“Yes, sir.”

“All of those mendicants advocate austerities.

Do you see Anuruddha walking together with several mendicants?”

“Yes, sir.”

“All of those mendicants have clairvoyance.

Do you see Puṇṇa son of Mantāṇī walking together with several mendicants?”

“Yes, sir.”

“All of those mendicants are Dhamma speakers.

Do you see Upāli walking together with several mendicants?”

“Yes, sir.”

“All of those mendicants are experts in monastic law.

Do you see Ānanda walking together with several mendicants?”

“Yes, sir.”

“All of those mendicants are very learned.

Do you see Devadatta walking together with several mendicants?”

“Yes, sir.”

“All of those mendicants have corrupt wishes.

Sentient beings join together and converge because of an element.

Those who have inferior convictions join together and converge with those who have inferior convictions.

Those who have good convictions join together and converge with those who have good convictions.

In the past,

in the future,

and also in the present, sentient beings join together and converge because of an element.

Those who have inferior convictions join together and converge with those who have inferior convictions.

Those who have good convictions join together and converge with those who have good convictions.”
