Linked Discourses 14.10

1. Diversity

No Diversity of Gains

At Sāvatthī.

“Mendicants, diversity of elements gives rise to diversity of perceptions.

Diversity of perceptions gives rise to diversity of thoughts. …

contacts …

feelings …

desires …

passions …

Diversity of searches gives rise to diversity of gains.

Diversity of gains doesn’t give rise to diversity of searches.

Diversity of searches doesn’t give rise to diversity of passions. …

desires …

feelings …

contacts …

thoughts …

Diversity of perceptions doesn’t give rise to diversity of elements.

And what is the diversity of elements?

The sight element, the sound element, the smell element, the taste element, the touch element, and the idea element.

This is called the diversity of elements.

And how does diversity of elements give rise to diversity of perceptions,

and diversity of perceptions give rise to diversity of thoughts?

contacts …

feelings …

desires …

passions …

searches …

gains …

while diversity of gains doesn’t give rise to diversity of searches …

passions …

desires …

feelings …

contacts …

thoughts … perceptions … elements?

The sight element gives rise to the perception of sights …

The idea element gives rise to the perception of ideas …

The search for ideas gives rise to gaining ideas.

The gaining of ideas doesn’t give rise to the search for ideas. The search for ideas doesn’t give rise to the passion for ideas. The passion for ideas doesn’t give rise to the desire for ideas. The desire for ideas doesn’t give rise to feeling born of idea contact. Feeling born of idea contact doesn’t give rise to idea contact. Idea contact doesn’t give rise to thoughts about ideas. Thoughts about ideas don’t give rise to perceptions of ideas. Perceptions of ideas don’t give rise to the idea element.

That’s how diversity of elements gives rise to diversity of perceptions …

diversity of perceptions doesn’t give rise to diversity of elements.”
