Linked Discourses 22.103

11. Ends

Ends

At Sāvatthī.

“Mendicants, there are these four ends.

What four?

The end that is substantial reality, the end that is the origin of substantial reality, the end that is the cessation of substantial reality, and the end that is the practice that leads to the cessation of substantial reality.

And what is the end that is substantial reality?

It should be said: the five grasping aggregates.

What five?

That is, the grasping aggregates of form, feeling, perception, choices, and consciousness.

This is called the end that is substantial reality.

And what is the end that is the origin of substantial reality?

It’s the craving that leads to future lives, mixed up with relishing and greed, taking pleasure there wherever it alights. That is,

craving for sensual pleasures, craving for existence, and craving for nonexistence.

This is called the end that is the origin of substantial reality.

And what is the end that is the cessation of substantial reality?

It’s the fading away and cessation of that very same craving with nothing left over; giving it away, letting it go, releasing it, and not clinging to it.

This is called the end that is the cessation of substantial reality.

And what is the end that is the practice that leads to the cessation of substantial reality?

It is simply this noble eightfold path, that is:

right view, right purpose, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion.

This is called the end that is the practice that leads to the cessation of substantial reality.

These are the four ends.”
