Linked Discourses 24.8

1. Stream-Entry

The Extensive View

At Sāvatthī.

“Mendicants, when what exists, because of grasping what and insisting on what, does the view arise:

‘There are these seven substances that are not made, not derived, not created, without a creator, barren, steady as a mountain peak, standing firm like a pillar.

They don’t move or deteriorate or obstruct each other. They’re unable to cause pleasure, pain, or both pleasure and pain to each other.

What seven?

The substances of earth, water, fire, air; pleasure, pain, and the soul is the seventh.

These seven substances are not made, not derived, not created, without a creator, barren, steady as a mountain peak, standing firm like a pillar.

They don’t move or deteriorate or obstruct each other. They’re unable to cause pleasure, pain, or both pleasure and pain to each other.

If you chop off someone’s head with a sharp sword, you don’t take anyone’s life.

The sword simply passes through the gap between the seven substances.

There are 1.4 million main wombs, and 6,000, and 600; 500 deeds, and five, and three; deeds and half-deeds; 62 paths of practice, 62 sub-eons, six classes of rebirth, and eight stages in a person’s life; 4,900 Ājīvaka ascetics, 4,900 wanderers, and 4,900 dragon abodes; 2,000 lordships, 3,000 hells, and 36 realms of dusky sky; seven percipient embryos, seven non-percipient embryos, seven knotless embryos, seven gods, seven mental heavens, seven goblins, seven streams, seven castoff incarnations and 700 castoff incarnations, seven downfalls and 700 downfalls, seven dreams and 700 dreams, and 8.4 million great eons—through all of which the foolish and the astute transmigrate before making an end of suffering.

And here there is no such thing as this: “By this precept or observance or fervent austerity or spiritual practice I shall force unripened deeds to bear their fruit, or eliminate old deeds by experiencing their results little by little”—for that cannot be.

Pleasure and pain are allotted. Transmigration lasts only for a limited period, so there’s no increase or decrease, no getting better or worse.

It’s like how, when you toss a ball of string, it rolls away unraveling.

In the same way, after transmigrating the foolish and the astute roll away unraveling as far as pleasure and pain extend’?”

“Our teachings are rooted in the Buddha. …”

“When form exists, because of grasping form and insisting on form, the view arises:

‘There are these seven substances that are not made …

the foolish and the astute will make an end of suffering.’

When feeling …

perception …

choices …

consciousness exists, because of grasping consciousness and insisting on consciousness, the view arises:

‘There are these seven substances that are not made …

the foolish and the astute will make an end of suffering.’

What do you think, mendicants?

Is form permanent or impermanent?”

“Impermanent, sir.” …

“That which is seen, heard, thought, known, attained, sought, and explored by the mind: is that permanent or impermanent?”

“Impermanent, sir.” …

“But by not grasping what’s impermanent, suffering, and perishable, would such a view arise?”

“No, sir.”

“When a noble disciple has given up doubt regarding these six grounds, and has given up doubt in suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the practice that leads to its cessation,

they’re called a noble disciple who is a stream-enterer, not liable to be reborn in the underworld, assured, destined for awakening.”
