Linked Discourses 35.146

15. The Old and the New

The Cessation of Deeds

“Mendicants, I will teach you old deeds, new deeds, the cessation of deeds, and the practice that leads to the cessation of deeds.

Listen and apply your mind well, I will speak. …

And what is old deeds?

The eye is old deeds. It should be seen as produced by choices and intentions, as something to be felt.

The ear … nose … tongue … body …

mind is old deeds. It should be seen as produced by choices and intentions, as something to be felt.

This is called old deeds.

And what is new deeds?

The deeds you currently perform by way of body, speech, and mind.

These are called new deeds.

And what is the cessation of deeds?

When you experience freedom due to the cessation of deeds by body, speech, and mind.

This is called the cessation of deeds.

And what’s the practice that leads to the cessation of deeds?

It is simply this noble eightfold path, that is:

right view, right purpose, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion.

This is called the practice that leads to the cessation of deeds.

So, mendicants, I’ve taught you old deeds, new deeds, the cessation of deeds, and the practice that leads to the cessation of deeds.

Out of sympathy, I’ve done what a teacher should do who wants what’s best for their disciples.

Here are these roots of trees, and here are these empty huts. Practice absorption, mendicants! Don’t be negligent! Don’t regret it later! This is my instruction to you.”
