Linked Discourses 35.90

9. With Channa

Turbulence (1st)

“Mendicants, turbulence is a disease, a boil, a dart.

That’s why the Realized One lives unperturbed, with dart drawn out.

Now, a mendicant might wish: ‘May I live unperturbed, with dart drawn out.’

So let them not conceive anything to be the eye, let them not conceive it in the eye, let them not conceive it as the eye, let them not conceive that ‘the eye is mine.’

Let them not conceive sights …

eye consciousness …

eye contact …

Let them not conceive anything to be the pleasant, painful, or neutral feeling that arises dependent on eye contact. Let them not conceive it in that, let them not conceive it as that, and let them not conceive that ‘that is mine.’

Let them not conceive anything to be the ear …

nose …

tongue …

body …

mind …

ideas …

mind consciousness …

mind contact …

Let them not conceive anything to be the pleasant, painful, or neutral feeling that arises dependent on mind contact. Let them not conceive it in that, let them not conceive it as that, and let them not conceive that ‘that is mine.’

Let them not conceive anything to be all, let them not conceive it in all, let them not conceive it as all, let them not conceive that ‘all is mine’.

Not conceiving, they don’t grasp at anything in the world.

Not grasping, they’re not anxious. Not being anxious, they personally become extinguished.

They understand: ‘Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further for this place.’”
