Linked Discourses 35.31

3. All

The Practice Conducive to Uprooting (1st)

“Mendicants, I will teach you the practice that’s conducive to uprooting all conceiving.

Listen …

And what is the practice that’s conducive to uprooting all conceiving?

It’s when a mendicant does not conceive anything to be the eye, does not conceive it in the eye, does not conceive it as the eye, and does not conceive that ‘the eye is mine.’

They don’t conceive anything to be sights …

eye consciousness … eye contact. And they don’t conceive anything to be the pleasant, painful, or neutral feeling that arises dependent on eye contact. They don’t conceive it in that, they don’t conceive it as that, and they don’t conceive that ‘that is mine.’

For whatever you conceive it to be, whatever you conceive it in, whatever you conceive it as, and whatever you conceive to be ‘mine’: that becomes something else.

The world is attached to being, taking pleasure only in being, yet it becomes something else.

They don’t conceive anything to be the ear … nose … tongue …

body …

mind …

They don’t conceive anything to be the pleasant, painful, or neutral feeling that arises dependent on mind contact. They don’t conceive it in that, they don’t conceive it as that, and they don’t conceive that ‘that is mine.’

For whatever you conceive it to be, whatever you conceive it in, whatever you conceive it as, and whatever you conceive to be ‘mine’: that becomes something else.

The world is attached to being, taking pleasure only in being, yet it becomes something else.

As far as the aggregates, elements, and sense fields extend, they don’t conceive anything to be that, they don’t conceive it in that, they don’t conceive it as that, and they don’t conceive that ‘that is mine.’

Not conceiving, they don’t grasp at anything in the world.

Not grasping, they’re not anxious. Not being anxious, they personally become extinguished.

They understand: ‘Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further for this place.’

This is the practice that’s conducive to uprooting all conceiving.”
