Linked Discourses 35.62

6. Ignorance

The Depletion of All Fuel for Grasping (2nd)

“Mendicants, I will teach you the principle for depleting all fuel for grasping.

Listen …

And what is the principle for depleting all fuel for grasping?

What do you think, mendicants?

Is the eye permanent or impermanent?”

“Impermanent, sir.”

“But if it’s impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?”

“Suffering, sir.”

“But if it’s impermanent, suffering, and perishable, is it fit to be regarded thus:

‘This is mine, I am this, this is my self’?”

“No, sir.”

“Sights …

eye consciousness …

eye contact …

The pleasant, painful, or neutral feeling that arises dependent on eye contact: is that permanent or impermanent?”

“Impermanent, sir.” …

“Ear …

nose …

tongue …

body …

mind …

ideas …

mind consciousness …

mind contact …

The pleasant, painful, or neutral feeling that arises dependent on mind contact: is that permanent or impermanent?”

“Impermanent, sir.”

“But if it’s impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?”

“Suffering, sir.”

“But if it’s impermanent, suffering, and perishable, is it fit to be regarded thus:

‘This is mine, I am this, this is my self’?”

“No, sir.”

“Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows disillusioned with the eye, sights, eye consciousness, and eye contact.

And they grow disillusioned with the painful, pleasant, or neutral feeling that arises dependent on eye contact.

They grow disillusioned with the ear … nose … tongue … body …

They grow disillusioned with the mind, ideas, mind consciousness, and mind contact.

And they grow disillusioned with the painful, pleasant, or neutral feeling that arises dependent on mind contact.

Being disillusioned, desire fades away. When desire fades away they’re freed. When they’re freed, they know they’re freed.

They understand: ‘Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further for this place.’

This is the principle for depleting all fuel for grasping.”
