Linked Discourses 35.30

3. All

The Practice Fit for Uprooting

“Mendicants, I will teach you the practice fit for uprooting all conceiving.

Listen and apply your mind well, I will speak. …

And what is the practice fit for uprooting all conceiving?

It’s when a mendicant does not conceive anything to be the eye, does not conceive it in the eye, does not conceive it as the eye, and does not conceive that ‘the eye is mine.’

They don’t conceive anything to be sights, they don’t conceive it in sights, they don’t conceive it as sights, and they don’t conceive that ‘sights are mine.’

They don’t conceive eye consciousness …

eye contact …

They don’t conceive anything to be the pleasant, painful, or neutral feeling that arises dependent on eye contact. They don’t conceive it in that, they don’t conceive it as that, and they don’t conceive that ‘that is mine.’

They don’t conceive anything to be the ear … nose … tongue …

body …

mind …

They don’t conceive anything to be the pleasant, painful, or neutral feeling that arises dependent on mind contact. They don’t conceive it in that, they don’t conceive it as that, and they don’t conceive that ‘that is mine.’

They don’t conceive anything to be all, they don’t conceive it in all, they don’t conceive it as all, and they don’t conceive that ‘all is mine.’

Not conceiving, they don’t grasp at anything in the world.

Not grasping, they’re not anxious. Not being anxious, they personally become extinguished.

They understand: ‘Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further for this place.’

This is the practice fit for uprooting all conceiving.”
