Linked Discourses 35.93

9. With Channa

A Duality (2nd)

“Mendicants, consciousness originates dependent on a duality.

And what is that duality?

Eye consciousness arises dependent on the eye and sights.

The eye is impermanent, decaying, and perishing.

Sights are impermanent, decaying, and perishing.

So this duality is tottering and toppling; it’s impermanent, decaying, and perishing.

Eye consciousness is impermanent, decaying, and perishing.

And the causes and reasons that give rise to eye consciousness are also impermanent, decaying, and perishing.

But since eye consciousness has arisen dependent on conditions that are impermanent, how could it be permanent?

The meeting, coming together, and joining together of these three things is called eye contact.

Eye contact is also impermanent, decaying, and perishing.

And the causes and reasons that give rise to eye contact are also impermanent, decaying, and perishing.

But since eye contact has arisen dependent on conditions that are impermanent, how could it be permanent?

Contacted one feels; contacted one intends; contacted one perceives.

So these things too are tottering and toppling; they’re impermanent, decaying, and perishing.

Ear consciousness … Nose consciousness … Tongue consciousness … Body consciousness …

Mind consciousness arises dependent on the mind and ideas.

The mind is impermanent, decaying, and perishing.

Ideas are impermanent, decaying, and perishing.

So this duality is tottering and toppling; it’s impermanent, decaying, and perishing.

Mind consciousness is impermanent, decaying, and perishing.

And the causes and reasons that give rise to mind consciousness are also impermanent, decaying, and perishing.

But since mind consciousness has arisen dependent on conditions that are impermanent, how could it be permanent?

The meeting, coming together, and joining together of these three things is called mind contact.

Mind contact is also impermanent, decaying, and perishing.

And the causes and reasons that give rise to mind contact are also impermanent, decaying, and perishing.

But since mind contact has arisen dependent on conditions that are impermanent, how could it be permanent?

Contacted one feels; contacted one intends; contacted one perceives.

So these things too are tottering and toppling; they’re impermanent, decaying, and perishing.

This is how consciousness originates dependent on a duality.”
