Linked Discourses 45.4

1. Ignorance

Regarding the Brahmin Jānussoṇi

At Sāvatthī.

Then Venerable Ānanda robed up in the morning and, taking his bowl and robe, entered Sāvatthī for alms.

He saw the brahmin Jānussoṇi driving out of Sāvatthī in an all-white chariot drawn by mares.

The yoked horses were pure white, as were the ornaments, chariot, upholstery, reins, goad, and canopy. And his turban, robes, sandals were white, as was the chowry fanning him.

When people saw it they exclaimed,

“Wow! That’s a divine vehicle!

It’s a vehicle fit for divinity!”

Then Ānanda wandered for alms in Sāvatthī. After the meal, on his return from almsround, he went to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and told him what had happened, adding,

“Sir, can you point out a divine vehicle in this teaching and training?”

“I can, Ānanda,” said the Buddha.

“These are all terms for the noble eightfold path:

‘divine vehicle’, or else ‘vehicle of truth’, or else ‘supreme victory in battle’.

When right view is developed and cultivated it culminates with the removal of greed, hate, and delusion.

When right purpose …

right speech …

right action …

right livelihood …

right effort …

right mindfulness …

right immersion is developed and cultivated it culminates with the removal of greed, hate, and delusion.

This is a way to understand how these are all terms for the noble eightfold path:

‘divine vehicle’, or else ‘vehicle of truth’, or else ‘supreme victory in battle’.”

That is what the Buddha said.

Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to say:

“Of which the qualities of faith and wisdom

are always yoked to the shaft;

conscience its draft-pole, mind its strap,

mindfulness its careful driver;

the chariot equipped with ethics,

its axle absorption, energy its wheel;

equanimity and immersion its draft-pole,

desirelessness its upholstery;

of which good will, harmlessness,

and seclusion are its weaponry;

endurance, its shield and armor:

to sanctuary from the yoke it rolls—

this, originating in oneself,

is the supreme divine vehicle.

The attentive leave the world in it,

sure of winning the victory.”
