Linked Discourses 46.2

1. Mountains

The Body

At Sāvatthī.

“Mendicants, this body is sustained by food. It depends on food to continue, and without food it doesn’t continue.

In the same way, the five hindrances are sustained by fuel. They depend on fuel to continue, and without fuel they don’t continue.

And what fuels the arising of sensual desire, or, when it has arisen, makes it increase and grow?

There is the feature of beauty.

Frequent irrational application of mind to that

fuels the arising of sensual desire, or, when it has arisen, makes it increase and grow.

And what fuels the arising of ill will, or, when it has arisen, makes it increase and grow?

There is the feature of aversion.

Frequent irrational application of mind to that

fuels the arising of ill will, or, when it has arisen, makes it increase and grow.

And what fuels the arising of dullness and drowsiness, or, when they have arisen, makes them increase and grow?

There is discontent, sloth, yawning, sleepiness after eating, and mental sluggishness.

Frequent irrational application of mind to them

fuels the arising of dullness and drowsiness, or, when they have arisen, makes them increase and grow.

And what fuels the arising of restlessness and remorse, or, when they have arisen, makes them increase and grow?

There is the unsettled mind.

Frequent irrational application of mind to that

fuels the arising of restlessness and remorse, or, when they have arisen, makes them increase and grow.

And what fuels the arising of doubt, or, when it has arisen, makes it increase and grow?

There are things that are grounds for doubt.

Frequent irrational application of mind to them

fuels the arising of doubt, or, when it has arisen, makes it increase and grow.

This body is sustained by food. It depends on food to continue, and without food it doesn’t continue.

In the same way, the five hindrances are sustained by fuel. They depend on fuel to continue, and without fuel they don’t continue.

This body is sustained by food. It depends on food to continue, and without food it doesn’t continue.

In the same way, the seven awakening factors are sustained by fuel. They depend on fuel to continue, and without fuel they don’t continue.

And what fuels the arising of the awakening factor of mindfulness, or, when it has arisen, fully develops it?

There are things that are grounds for the awakening factor of mindfulness.

Frequent rational application of mind to them

fuels the arising of the awakening factor of mindfulness, or, when it has arisen, fully develops it.

And what fuels the arising of the awakening factor of investigation of principles, or, when it has arisen, fully develops it?

There are qualities that are skillful and unskillful, blameworthy and blameless, inferior and superior, and those with a portion of dark or bright.

Frequent rational application of mind to them

fuels the arising of the awakening factor of investigation of principles, or, when it has arisen, fully develops it.

And what fuels the arising of the awakening factor of energy, or, when it has arisen, fully develops it?

There are the elements of initiative, persistence, and exertion.

Frequent rational application of mind to them

fuels the arising of the awakening factor of energy, or, when it has arisen, fully develops it.

And what fuels the arising of the awakening factor of rapture, or, when it has arisen, fully develops it?

There are things that are grounds for the awakening factor of rapture.

Frequent rational application of mind to them

fuels the arising of the awakening factor of rapture, or, when it has arisen, fully develops it.

And what fuels the arising of the awakening factor of tranquility, or, when it has arisen, fully develops it?

There is tranquility of the body and of the mind.

Frequent rational application of mind to that

fuels the arising of the awakening factor of tranquility, or, when it has arisen, fully develops it.

And what fuels the arising of the awakening factor of immersion, or, when it has arisen, fully develops it?

There are things that are the basis of serenity and freedom from distraction.

Frequent rational application of mind to them

fuels the arising of the awakening factor of immersion, or, when it has arisen, fully develops it.

And what fuels the arising of the awakening factor of equanimity, or, when it has arisen, fully develops it?

There are things that are grounds for the awakening factor of equanimity.

Frequent rational application of mind to them

fuels the arising of the awakening factor of equanimity, or, when it has arisen, fully develops it.

This body is sustained by food. It depends on food to continue, and without food it doesn’t continue.

In the same way, the seven awakening factors are sustained by fuel. They depend on fuel to continue, and without fuel they don’t continue.”
