Linked Discourses 46.30

3. With Udāyī

With Udāyī

At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Sumbhas, near the town of the Sumbhas named Sedaka.

Then Venerable Udāyī went up to the Buddha … and said to him:

“It’s incredible, sir, it’s amazing!

How helpful my fondness and respect for the Buddha have been, and my sense of conscience and prudence.

For when I was still a layman, I wasn’t helped much by the teaching or the Saṅgha.

But when I considered my fondness and respect for the Buddha, and my sense of conscience and prudence, I went forth from the lay life to homelessness.

The Buddha taught me the Dhamma:

‘Such is form, such is the origin of form, such is the disappearance of form.

Such is feeling …

Such is perception …

Such are choices …

Such is consciousness, such is the origin of consciousness, such is the disappearance of consciousness.’

Then, while staying in an empty hut, I followed the churning of the five grasping aggregates. I truly understood: ‘This is suffering’ … ‘This is the origin of suffering’ … ‘This is the cessation of suffering’ … ‘This is the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering’.

I comprehended the teaching, sir, I acquired the path.

This, when developed and cultivated by me meditating in just such a way, will bring me to such a state that I will understand:

‘Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further for this place.’

I acquired the awakening factors of mindfulness, investigation of principles, energy, rapture, tranquility, immersion, and equanimity.

Each of these, when developed and cultivated by me meditating in just such a way, will bring me to such a state that I will understand:

‘Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further for this place.’

This is the path that I acquired which, when developed and cultivated by me meditating in just such a way, will bring me to such a state that I will understand:

‘Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further for this place.’”

“Good, good, Udāyī!

For that is indeed the path that you acquired which, when developed and cultivated by you meditating in just such a way, will bring you to such a state that you will understand:

‘Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further for this place.’”
