Linked Discourses 47.40

4. Not Learned From Anyone Else

Analysis

“Mendicants, I will teach you mindfulness meditation, the development of mindfulness meditation, and the practice that leads to the development of mindfulness meditation.

Listen …

And what is mindfulness meditation?

It’s when a mendicant meditates by observing an aspect of the body—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

They meditate observing an aspect of feelings …

mind …

principles—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

This is called mindfulness meditation.

And what is the development of mindfulness meditation?

It’s when a mendicant, with respect to the body, meditates observing the liability to originate, to vanish, and to originate and vanish—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

With respect to feelings …

mind …

principles, they meditate observing the liability to originate, to vanish, and to originate and vanish—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

This is called the development of mindfulness meditation.

And what is the practice that leads to the development of mindfulness meditation?

It is simply this noble eightfold path, that is:

right view, right purpose, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right immersion.

This is called the practice that leads to the development of mindfulness meditation.”
