Linked Discourses 47.18

2. At Nāḷandā

Divinity

At one time, when he was first awakened, the Buddha was staying in Uruvelā at the goatherd’s banyan tree on the bank of the Nerañjarā River.

Then as he was in private retreat this thought came to his mind,

“The four kinds of mindfulness meditation are the path to convergence. They are in order to purify sentient beings, to get past sorrow and crying, to make an end of pain and sadness, to discover the system, and to realize extinguishment.

What four?

A mendicant would meditate observing an aspect of the body—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

Or they’d meditate observing an aspect of feelings …

or mind …

or principles—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

The four kinds of mindfulness meditation are the path to convergence. They are in order to purify sentient beings, to get past sorrow and crying, to make an end of pain and sadness, to discover the system, and to realize extinguishment.”

Then the divinity Sahampati knew the Buddha’s train of thought. As easily as a strong person would extend or contract their arm, he vanished from the realm of divinity and reappeared in front of the Buddha.

He arranged his robe over one shoulder, raised his cupped palms toward the Buddha, and said:

“That’s so true, Blessed One! That’s so true, Holy One!

Sir, the four kinds of mindfulness meditation are the path to convergence. They are in order to purify sentient beings, to get past sorrow and crying, to make an end of pain and sadness, to discover the system, and to realize extinguishment.

What four?

A mendicant would meditate observing an aspect of the body—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

Or they’d meditate observing an aspect of feelings …

or mind …

or principles—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of covetousness and displeasure for the world.

The four kinds of mindfulness meditation are the path to convergence. They are in order to purify sentient beings, to get past sorrow and crying, to make an end of pain and sadness, to discover the system, and to realize extinguishment.”

That’s what the divinity Sahampati said.

Then he went on to say:

“The compassionate one, <j>who sees the ending of rebirth,

understands the path to convergence.

By this path people crossed over before,

will cross, and are crossing.”
