Linked Discourses 48.49

5. Old Age

About Bhāradvāja the Alms-Gatherer

So I have heard.

At one time the Buddha was staying near Kosambī, in Ghosita’s Monastery.

Now at that time Venerable Bhāradvāja the Alms-Gatherer had declared enlightenment:

“I understand: ‘Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further for this place.’”

Then several mendicants went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and told him what had happened. Then they said,

“What reason does Bhāradvāja the Alms-Gatherer see for doing this?”

“It’s because Bhāradvāja the Alms-Gatherer has developed and cultivated three faculties that he declares enlightenment:

‘I understand: “Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further for this place.”’

What three?

The faculties of mindfulness, immersion, and wisdom.

It’s because Bhāradvāja the Alms-Gatherer has developed and cultivated these three faculties that he declares enlightenment.

What’s the culmination of these three faculties?

They culminate in ending.

In the ending of what?

Of rebirth, old age, and death.

It’s because he sees that they culminate in the ending of rebirth, old age, and death that Bhāradvāja the Alms-Gatherer declares enlightenment:

‘I understand: “Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further for this place.”’”
