Linked Discourses 48.58

6. The Boar’s Cave

The Boar’s Cave

At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, on the Vulture’s Peak Mountain in the Boar’s Cave.

Then the Buddha said to Venerable Sāriputta:

“Sāriputta, considering what benefit does a mendicant with defilements ended, in rolling forth, roll forth with utmost deference for the Realized One or his instructions?”

“Sir, it is considering the supreme sanctuary from the yoke that a mendicant with defilements ended, in rolling forth, rolls forth with utmost deference for the Realized One or his instructions.”

“Good, good, Sāriputta!

For it is considering the supreme sanctuary from the yoke that a mendicant whose defilements are ended, in rolling forth, rolls forth with utmost deference for the Realized One or his instructions.

And what is that supreme sanctuary from the yoke?”

“It’s when a mendicant with defilements ended develops the faculties of faith,

energy,

mindfulness,

immersion,

and wisdom, which lead to peace and awakening.

It is considering this supreme sanctuary from the yoke that a mendicant with defilements ended, in rolling forth, rolls forth with utmost deference for the Realized One or his instructions.”

“Good, good, Sāriputta!

For this is that supreme sanctuary from the yoke.

And what is that utmost deference that a mendicant with defilements ended, in rolling forth, shows towards the Realized One or his instructions?”

“It’s when a mendicant with defilements ended maintains respect and reverence for the Teacher, the teaching, the Saṅgha, the training, and immersion.

This is that utmost deference.”

“Good, good, Sāriputta!

For this is that utmost deference that a mendicant with defilements ended, in rolling forth, shows towards the Realized One or his instructions.”
